
---
date: 
Type:  note
tags: university spanish [[SP1001]] lectures literature latin-america short-story  
Status:  
---
Linking: [[SP1001]], [[SP1001 Literature]], 

# Seven Stories
```toc
```
## Lecture 1: Juan Rulfo and Introduction to the Short Story
### The Short Story
- Brevity
	- Accessibility
	- Hints, allusions, silences (due to narrative economy)
- Orality: comes with different versions and interpretations, continuously changed
- Storytelling (fables, myths, parables, etc)

Esteban Echeverría
- *El matadero*
- One of the earliest short stories

Jorege Luis Borges (Argentina 1899-1986)
 - *Ficciones* (1994), *Aleph* (1949)
 - Ficción/realidad ('Las ruinas circulares')
 - Very interested in **Narrative Economy** (brevity).
	 - Aristotle's Poetics
	 - anagkaion --> necessity

### *Diles que no me maten*, Juan Rulfo
Jalisco 1918-1986
Born a year before the end of the Mexican Revolution
Lived through La guerra de los cristeros (1920s)
- Political unrest and war is the background atmosphere of his stories
His family suffers finacial ruin. His father and two uncles murdered in the troubles and his mother dies later, he grows up in an orphanage; death and solitude are a constant theme.

Themes of solitude and post-revolution Mexico inform Rulfo's work.

El Porfiriato
- Political power in the hands of a select few (caciques)
- Injustice etc.

La guerra de los cristeros
- Liberals put laws in place to forbid preists voting, suspended religious services and took power away from the Church as it was seen by them as the bastion of...
- Accentuated the chaos of post-revolutionary Mexico


Themes in the short story
1. Deep seated human drives
	1. Will to live
	2. Desire for revenge
	3. Solitude
2. Problematic father/son relationship
3. Mexican identity

Rulfo's most dramatic story
- Well-integrated description of the arid landscape with equally arid language
- Constant shift between hope and despair, which is exhausting
- 


## Lecture 2: García Márquez and Cortázar
### García Márquez
Early work focuses on the violence and intolerance in Colombia
- El Bogotazo
	- Massive riots following the assassination of the Liberal presidential candidate
	- c. 5000 deaths resulted from the 10 hour riot in Bogotá
	- Launched a violent period in Colombian history
	- Civil war between the Conservatives and Liberals. Conflict still influential today.
La hojarasca (1955)
El coronel no tiene quien le escriba (1961)
Los funerales de la mamá grande (1962)

Cien Años de Soledad.
- Written while in exile in Mexico (1967)
- Highly influential on Latin American and world literature
- foundational text of what is known as magical realism

### Magical Realism
- A tendency in Latin American writing in the 1960s-70s to incorporate magical elements into a narrative that is seemingly realistic
- Aim: to provide a more complex understanding of the reality that the author seeks to represent

*La visión de los vencidos* book
- Language insufficient to describe clashing clutures and knowledge.
- Mutual exchange of ideas and realities --> hybrid forms (culture)

Argentina: la conquista del desierto
Criollos called it la conquista
The indigenous people called it genocide

criollo: someone who has european ancestry but was born and raised in Latin America
mestizo: someone of mixed heritage
indigena: indigenous

### Latin American Boom
Magical Realism was one of the tendencies of the Latin American Boom

- 1960s
- A number of Latin American writers considered and promoted as very innovative (in Europe and the USA,)
Seix Barral
- It is not a generation, nor a movement
- It is a tendency in writing, a literary style
	- Innovative and experimental (structure and content)
	- also known as 'nueva novela' (but not a great term as many were not novels, but rather short stories etc.)

If there is a 'boom' in the 1960s and 1970s, it is the unprecedented interest in Latin American fiction outside Latin American. There were plenty of influential writers before the boom, simply not the international promotion of them.

Magical Realism is not fantastic realism. It is a blend of realism and fantasy: you have a realistic context, suddenly something happens to kick you out of it but it comes to be accepted. It is not fantasy!

Metaphors that stand for the complex and often irreconcilable realities of the continent:
- Politics (dictatorships, violence, massacres...)
- Society (extreme stratification...)
- Culture (Amerindian, European, African...)

### Julio Cortázar
- Cortázar: in a novel there are various happenings in succesion. In the short story there is a principle happening which serves as a core whereby the actions of the heroes are articulated
- Cortázar: in the short story the hermeneutic scope of the text is amplified
- Makes use of colloquial language, orality, a fantastic/disturbing atmosphere.
- The reader is trapped through alteration of syntax and dissolution of reality.
	- It is Cortázar's Neofantastic

*The present state of Fiction in Latin America*, Cortázar
- "Many of my fantastic stories were born in an oneiric territory" (oneiric reffering to dreams)
	- Influenced by Freud's ideas of the unconscious
	- Influenced by surrealism

Cortázar's Neofantastic
- Refers to the intrusion of the fantastic, marvellous element in everyday life
	- Which we do not realise until it is too late
- "La alteración momentánea dentro de la regularidad"
- An osmosis between the fantastic and the habitual, not a juxtaposition
Cortázar's example: Borges' "El milargro secreto"
- The universe becommes immobile, a whole year passes for Hladik such that he finishes his play; for the soldiers an instant has passed.

The Neofantastic
- Reality is permeated by the uncanny
- Highly subversive of Reason and its binary logical (real/unreal, normal/magical, ordinary/extraordinary)
- It is not real, not unreal, but something in between: The "third fronteir"

## Seminar 1: García Márquez and Cortázar
Cortazar: pdf

Garcia Marquez:
it is not magical realism. There is no fantastical reality, but rather imagination and fantasy and odd kindness and behaviours of people.
Baltazar & Urzula: challenging gender roles (he is the creator and she is more grounded?), a non-traditional family unit, 

"mas bella del mundo"

By leaving the cage behind he chooses the moral choice over the social choice of selling it for money.

Questions capitalism and the artistic market.

The idea of the dream at the end, he pretends that he sold the cage but in reality he is isolated. The happiest dream of his life, not just the night but also his wish to be a succesfully selling artist.

Why a cage to symbolise art: 
- confinement? Is art not freedom?
- Perhaps art is confined within a capitalist society, or that it is a product of society
- Art may not be freedom in that art will not provide answers, nor resolve our problems, but rather pose questions? Perhaps in this way we could liberate ourselves?
- He was free in his world of art, but entrapped within it. He could do nothing else, and ended up isolated in society.

## Lecture 3: Alejandro Carpentier
- Surrealism: the marvellous is artificially created (art)
- Lo real maravilloso: Latin America is marvellous in reality by nature, history, and culture
		Eurocentrism? Trying to promote cultural independency from Europe but at the same time is trapped within a Eurocentric narrative about the marvellous nature and culture of Latin America. Surely for the indigenous people living here before the conquest or even during the colonial period, there was nothing particularly marvellous about Latin America. It is a creation of the European narrative; even with the name: before the conquest there wasn't even anything to do with Latin (?).

| Alejandro Carpentier                                               | García Márquez                                                     |
| ------------------------------------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| As faithfull as possible to his sources                            | Explored history quite differently                                 |
| Did not seek to transform history, but narrate it                  | Overstepped the limits fo empirical reality and existing mythology |
| He did not create myths, but identified those already in existence | Invented his own versions, and did not deny this                   |

Magical Realism or El real maravilloso?
| Cien Años...                                                                                                                 | El reino...                                                                                                                        |
| ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Inexplicable phenomena that are contrary to nature but described as if they weree everyday occurances (metaphorical reality) | Description of unreal that may be perceived as real by a certain group of people (reality as a matter of perception/point of view) |
| Meaning depends on the internal structure of the world created by the author (fiction)                                       | Meaning principally derives from the author’s opinion of a world external to the novel (history)                                   |
| Phenomena that occur in violation of natural laws                                                                            | The author identifies the presence of the marvellous in reality without changing or broadening reality’s scope                     |
|                                                                                                                              | Literal transcriptions of the real world (e.g. the myth of Mackandal)                                                                                                                                   |

### Viaje a la semilla
- 1994 (later in *Guerra del tiempo*, 1958)
- Experimental story; sophisticated, complex structure
- Plot: the life of Márquez de Campellanías in reverse chronological order

- Animism, the nucleus of the story
	- Why is this happening? Central question

- The entrance of Melchor becomes the means by which the 'real maravilloso' invades the young boy's life.

- Is this just a story about a sorcerer's powers -- not really.

## Seminar 2: Viaje a la semilla
Prediction when time is going backwards is really re-telling.


Regressive Time
Cyclical Time: Ceres (agriculture, cyclical notions of time)
Progressive Time

The clash between progressive and regressive time.


16th Century Europe: renaissance (rebirth of Classical knowledge in Europe, idea that the best of times were the Greek and Romans)

18th Century Enlightenment

A-theory and B-theory of time?

Many great civilisations had cyclical ideas of time, or at least cyclical representations of time (e.g. Aztec, Mexica, Egyptian)

Just by changing the point of view/perspective, the mundane real becomes lo real maravilloso.
Everything looks marvellous from this new perspective of time.


About unlearning rather than learning?

An allegory of decolononialisation, of unlearning European cultural colonialisation?

But is there an issue with Carpentier's understanding of decolonialisation?
| Europe      | Latin America                           |
| ----------- | --------------------------------------- |
| Progression | Regression                              |
| Adulthood   | Childhood                               |
| Complexity  | Simplicity                              |
| Culture     | Nature, primitive, imagination, freedom |

Carpentier prefers the Latin American side; these were the stereotypes promoted by European colonialism. So Carpentier may be advocating for a decolonialisation into the colonial stereotypes of the indigenous culture, and not actually preferring the pre-colonial but the colonial image of the pre-colonial.




