# Questions
1. Find an interesting motif (symbol, image, object) in The House of Ulloa and give page numbers for where it occurs. Briefly explain what you think its function is and how it relates to the themes of the novel.
Purity. Moscoso's desire for a son and choice to marry Nuncha over Rita are two examples of a desire for some form of purity. Juli치n's desire for Nucha due to her purity is another. The first is a critique of the idea that a daughter would ruin the lineage of male succession, '"Moscoso fathers have Moscoso sons" has almost become a proverb', and the idea of a daughter being "Impossible" and worthy of abuse (p115). The second is an example of the motif of purity presented as a desirable quality embodied by reservation and the idea of sex as impure, or that a woman is almost only valuable as a unique commodity to be possesed. Juli치n's sexualisation of Nucha's purity, which presents the motif of purity in women as not only something desired due to gener norms and expectations in society but also something almost fetishised. This could also perhaps be seen when Don Pedro 'could not help smiling gently to himself' at Nucha's strong reaction when suddenly grabbed (p93-4). The motif of purity also presents itself in the conflict between town and city, and nature and civility when Juli치n first arrives at los Pazos de Ulloa.

2. To what extent do you, as a twenty-first century reader of the novel, find yourself conscious of reading a novel written by a woman for the first time on this module? Does it make any difference? Should it?
Knowing the context of Pardo Baz치n's views on religion, naturalism, and feminism before staring the reading influenced it quite significantly. I think it is inevitable to have the author in mind in some sense when reading a novel, especially when you learn about them beforehand, because there is a part of me which recognises that this is a text written by someone at a particular location. I think that a novel is interpreted differently when keeping the author in mind than when this is not the case, and that almost always it is more beneficial to recognise the historical context for a novel to gain a greater understanding of the text while not limiting its interpretation to the authorial intent or context. I did not particularly find the concept of adultery as central in this novel as it was in the previous two: although Effi Briest and Madame Bovary approach and use adultery in different ways, as well as focus on it in different ways, adultery seemed almost paradoxically unimportant and important at the same time. It was part of the context for the novel's succession of events and critiques, but seemed more like an example of a broader social critique and more of a background than in Madame Bovary where it is felt more centrally or in Effi Briest where it is almost tangential.

3. Thinking about the narrative voice in the novel, find an example which you think suggests a subjective or even judgmental narrative persona. Is this typical for the novel as a whole?
There are more obvious instances of the author and narrative persona intruding upon the novel. Such as with the tone (and the chapter mostly dedicated to a political rant).

