# W1 L1: Juan Rulfo and Introduction to the Short Story
## The Short Story
- Brevity
	- Accessibility
	- Hints, allusions, silences (due to narrative economy)
- Orality: comes with different versions and interpretations, continuously changed
- Storytelling (fables, myths, parables, etc)

Esteban Echeverría
- *El matadero*
- One of the earliest short stories

Jorege Luis Borges (Argentina 1899-1986)
 - *Ficciones* (1994), *Aleph* (1949)
 - Ficción/realidad ('Las ruinas circulares')
 - Very interested in **Narrative Economy** (brevity).
	 - Aristotle's Poetics
	 - anagkaion --> necessity

## *Diles que no me maten*, Juan Rulfo
Jalisco 1918-1986
Born a year before the end of the Mexican Revolution
Lived through La guerra de los cristeros (1920s)
- Political unrest and war is the background atmosphere of his stories
His family suffers finacial ruin. His father and two uncles murdered in the troubles and his mother dies later, he grows up in an orphanage; death and solitude are a constant theme.

Themes of solitude and post-revolution Mexico inform Rulfo's work.

El Porfiriato
- Political power in the hands of a select few (caciques)
- Injustice etc.

La guerra de los cristeros
- Liberals put laws in place to forbid preists voting, suspended religious services and took power away from the Church as it was seen by them as the bastion of...
- Accentuated the chaos of post-revolutionary Mexico


Themes in the short story
1. Deep seated human drives
	1. Will to live
	2. Desire for revenge
	3. Solitude
2. Problematic father/son relationship
3. Mexican identity

Rulfo's most dramatic story
- Well-integrated description of the arid landscape with equally arid language
- Constant shift between hope and despair, which is exhausting
- 


# W2 L2:
## García Márquez
Early work focuses on the violence and intolerance in Colombia
- El Bogotazo
	- Massive riots following the assassination of the Liberal presidential candidate
	- c. 5000 deaths resulted from the 10 hour riot in Bogotá
	- Launched a violent period in Colombian history
	- Civil war between the Conservatives and Liberals. Conflict still influential today.
La hojarasca (1955)
El coronel no tiene quien le escriba (1961)
Los funerales de la mamá grande (1962)

Cien Años de Soledad.
- Written while in exile in Mexico (1967)
- Highly influential on Latin American and world literature
- foundational text of what is known as magical realism

## Magical Realism
- A tendency in Latin American writing in the 1960s-70s to incorporate magical elements into a narrative that is seemingly realistic
- Aim: to provide a more complex understanding of the reality that the author seeks to represent

*La visión de los vencidos* book
- Language insufficient to describe clashing clutures and knowledge.
- Mutual exchange of ideas and realities --> hybrid forms (culture)

Argentina: la conquista del desierto
Criollos called it la conquista
The indigenous people called it genocide

criollo: someone who has european ancestry but was born and raised in Latin America
mestizo: someone of mixed heritage
indigena: indigenous

## Latin American Boom
Magical Realism was one of the tendencies of the Latin American Boom

- 1960s
- A number of Latin American writers considered and promoted as very innovative (in Europe and the USA,)
Seix Barral
- It is not a generation, nor a movement
- It is a tendency in writing, a literary style
	- Innovative and experimental (structure and content)
	- also known as 'nueva novela' (but not a great term as many were not novels, but rather short stories etc.)

If there is a 'boom' in the 1960s and 1970s, it is the unprecedented interest in Latin American fiction outside Latin American. There were plenty of influential writers before the boom, simply not the international promotion of them.

Magical Realism is not fantastic realism. It is a blend of realism and fantasy: you have a realistic context, suddenly something happens to kick you out of it but it comes to be accepted. It is not fantasy!

Metaphors that stand for the complex and often irreconcilable realities of the continent:
- Politics (dictatorships, violence, massacres...)
- Society (extreme stratification...)
- Culture (Amerindian, European, African...)

## Julio Cortázar
- Cortázar: in a novel there are various happenings in succesion. In the short story there is a principle happening which serves as a core whereby the actions of the heroes are articulated
- Cortázar: in the short story the hermeneutic scope of the text is amplified
- Makes use of colloquial language, orality, a fantastic/disturbing atmosphere.
- The reader is trapped through alteration of syntax and dissolution of reality.
	- It is Cortázar's Neofantastic

*The present state of Fiction in Latin America*, Cortázar
- "Many of my fantastic stories were born in an oneiric territory" (oneiric reffering to dreams)
	- Influenced by Freud's ideas of the unconscious
	- Influenced by surrealism

Cortázar's Neofantastic
- Refers to the intrusion of the fantastic, marvellous element in everyday life
	- Which we do not realise until it is too late
- "La alteración momentánea dentro de la regularidad"
- An osmosis between the fantastic and the habitual, not a juxtaposition
Cortázar's example: Borges' "El milargro secreto"
- The universe becommes immobile, a whole year passes for Hladik such that he finishes his play; for the soldiers an instant has passed.

The Neofantastic
- Reality is permeated by the uncanny
- Highly subversive of Reason and its binary logical (real/unreal, normal/magical, ordinary/extraordinary)
- It is not real, not unreal, but something in between: The "third fronteir"
